---
layout: :theme/post
title: It's alive!
categories: 
author: dmlloyd
date: 2024-11-01 14:39:02
---

## Braaaains...

Okay, well I missed Halloween by one day. But nevertheless... it's living!

Today I migrated my blog from (GitHub-driven) Jekyll to instead use [the blog capabilities of Roq](https://pages.quarkiverse.io/quarkus-roq/posts/roq-with-blogs/), a static site generator driven by Quarkus.
Overall the migration was pretty simple, but I'll go over the steps I took here anyway, in case anyone finds it helpful.

I had a few reasons for wanting to move, but mainly it's because I could never quite manage to build my site locally using Jekyll, which makes writing posts pretty painful. Ruby is just too finicky. I admire Ruby as a language - it's very cool - but I would prefer to have nothing to do with it in practice if I can avoid it.

Since Roq is backed by Quarkus, I can use its awesome development mode feature to check out the result of my edits as I go - in fact I'm doing it as I write this post.


## Creating the initial project

I basically followed the steps in the [Roq with Blogs](https://pages.quarkiverse.io/quarkus-roq/posts/roq-with-blogs/) post. All two of them.

First, create the initial project from your shell:

```
$ quarkus create app my-blog-name -x=io.quarkiverse.roq:quarkus-roq
```

Then, fire up dev mode: 

```
$ cd my-blog-name
$ quarkus dev
```

Easy as that, the site is already up and running on `localhost:8080`.


## Importing blog posts

Importing the posts was fairly easy. My Jekyll site used Markdown-formatted posts with front matter, and Roq also supports Markdown-formatted posts with front matter, so I just copied all the files from my old blog's `_posts` directory into `content/posts` and hit "reload" on the browser, and...

Kaboom! 💥

```
2024-11-01 12:04:51,193 ERROR [io.qua.dep.dev.IsolatedDevModeMain] (Aesh InputStream Reader) Failed to start quarkus: java.lang.RuntimeException: io.quarkus.builder.BuildException: Build failure: Build failed due to errors
	[error]: Build step io.quarkiverse.roq.frontmatter.deployment.data.RoqFrontMatterDataProcessor#prepareData threw an exception: java.lang.IllegalStateException: Invalid layout: layouts/post in my-post-name.md
 ... blah blah blah ...
```

Turns out, the `layout` front matter value has a slightly different syntax than what I used with Jekyll. My old blog had:

```yaml
---
layout: post
---
```

Whereas Roq prefers the `layout` argument to be more like this:

```yaml
---
layout: :theme/post
---
```

In my opinion, the syntax should be a little flexible, particularly in the case (like my case) where I'm importing posts from Jekyll. So I filed [a bug report](https://github.com/quarkiverse/quarkus-roq/issues/243). But I also fixed the entries to use the Roq syntax.

I also ran into [another problem](https://github.com/quarkiverse/quarkus-roq/issues/244) where the page failed to render if there was no `author:` tag, so I added that as well, even though my blog has only one author (and just barely one, at that). I filed a bug for that one as well, because why not?

Now, we're up and running!

## Intercepting old page URLs

My blog isn't much, but it has been around for quite a while; previously it was Jekyll, but before that it was a very crappy WordPress site. I wanted to make sure that those crusty old links still worked back when I imported them to Jekyll. And likewise, today (while I did want to take the opportunity to purge some of my less interesting, relevant, or simply more embarrassing utterances) I did retain a few posts that I thought had some small value. So I want to make sure that both the old WordPress links and the somewhat-less-old Jekyll links still work after this migration.

In Jekyll, you would use the `redirect_from` front matter item with a list of URLs, which causes those URLs to redirect to the current page versions. The Roq equivalent is to add the [`quarkus-roq-plugin-aliases` extension](https://docs.quarkiverse.io/quarkus-roq/dev/quarkus-roq-plugins.html#plugin-aliases) to your `pom.xml`. This extension adds support for an `aliases` item which works pretty much exactly like Jekyll's `redirect_from`:

```yaml
---
layout: :theme/post
title: Proper resource management
categories: 
date: 2008-07-28 21:22:00
aliases:
  - /2008/07/proper-resource-management.html
  - /proper-resource-management/
author: dmlloyd
---
```
That's it! The old links immediately started working. This is almost too easy; I might get lazy. Well, lazier.

## Overriding some defaults

I went through and updated a few of the defaults in the `about.md`, `index.html`, and `data/*.yml` files. I love the Roq logo, but it doesn't look like me. Well, it sort of looks like me, but I prefer a photo from when I was 15 years younger than I am now. Just look at that photo; it brings me back to a happier time, before I knew about such horrible things as COVID-19 and sciatic nerve pain.

## Replace the old tree

OK, it's time to blast the old site and replace it with this shiny new one.

Step one is to commit this whole project into a new Git repository. I did it like this:

```
$ git init
$ echo 'target' >> .gitignore
$ echo '.idea' >> .gitignore
$ git add .
$ git commit -m 'Completely new site'
```

But... I already have a Git repository for the old site, and I don't really want to force-push the new site and lose my commit history. So, my strategy here will be to use `git restore` to create a single commit which wipes out the old stuff and replaces it with the new stuff.

```
$ cd ../old-site
$ git fetch ../new-site
remote: Enumerating objects: 45, done.
remote: Counting objects: 100% (45/45), done.
remote: Compressing objects: 100% (38/38), done.
remote: Total 45 (delta 7), reused 0 (delta 0), pack-reused 0
Unpacking objects: 100% (45/45), 345.02 KiB | 9.86 MiB/s, done.
From ../new-site
$ git restore -s FETCH_HEAD .
$ git add .
$ git commit -m 'Replace with new blog'
```

Now, `old-site` has all the stuff that was in `new-site`, without any of the Jekyll stuff that was there before, but also retaining the full commit history. Nice trick eh?

## Publish to GitHub Pages

Now the tricky part. Let's publish this thing!

Having a look at the Roq [GitHub Pages configuration](https://docs.quarkiverse.io/quarkus-roq/dev/quarkus-roq-generator.html#_github_pages_configuration) page, it looks like all I have to do is add a `.github` workflow, which should be fairly familiar to anyone who has dealt with GitHub Actions.

And... well, it didn't work. I get a 404 for my custom domain, and [`dmlloyd.github.io`](https://dmlloyd.github.io) is not redirecting.

### Save the `CNAME`

Well, when I cleverly smashed the old Jekyll site, I also deleted the `CNAME` file which GitHub adds for you. Re-adding the domain in settings fixed that (and automatically made a commit to my branch for me), so now the splash page appears for my custom domain as well. Great! Except not great. But, better!

### Build from GitHub Actions

There's another switch that needs flipping in settings as well. Since I was deploying using Jekyll, I also needed to update my GitHub settings. Under "Build and deployment", there's a dropdown labelled "Source", where you can choose a branch or select "GitHub Actions". You have to choose the latter to get the site that is deployed using actions.
